Approved warriors and myfaithful friends,
I have received lettersfrom great Rome,
which signifies what hatethey bear their emperor
and how desirous of oursight they are.
Therefore, great lords, be,as your titles witness,
imperious and impatient ofyour wrongs;
and wherein Rome hath doneyou any scathe,
let him make treblesatisfaction.
Brave slip, sprung fromthe great Andronicus,
whose name was once ourterror, now our comfort,
whose high exploits andhonorable deeds
ingrateful Rome requiteswith foul contempt,
be bold in us: we'llfollow where thou lead'st,
like stinging bees inhottest summer's day,
led by their master to theflowered fields,
and be avenged on cursedTamora.
And as he saith, so say weall with him.
Ay.
I humbly thank him, and Ithank you all.
But who comes here, led bya lusty Goth?
Renowned Lucius, from ourtroops I strayed
to gaze upon a ruinousmonastery.
And as I earnestly did fixmine eye
upon the wasted building,
suddenly I heard a childcry underneath a wall.
I made unto the noise,when soon I heard
the crying babe controlledwith this discourse:
"Peace, tawny slave, halfme and half thy dame!
"Did not thy hue bewraywhose brat thou art,
"had nature lent thee butthy mother's look,
"villain, thou mightsthave been an emperor.
"But where the bull andcow are both milk-white,
"they never do beget acoal-black calf.
Peace, villain, peace! "
even thus he rates thebabe
"For I must bear thee to atrusty Goth,
"who, when he knows thouart the empress' babe,
will hold thee dearly forthy mother's sake."
With this, my weapondrawn, I rushed upon him,
surprised him suddenly,and brought him hither
to use as you thinkneedful of the man.
O, worthy Goth, this isthe incarnate devil
that robbed Andronicus ofhis good hand.
This is the pearl thatpleased your empress' eye.
And here's the base fruitof her burning lust.
Say, wall-eyed slave,whither wouldst thou convey
this growing image of thyfiend-like face?
Why dost not speak?
What, deaf?
Not a word?
A halter, soldiers!
Hang him on this tree,
and by his side his fruitof bastardy.
Touch not the boy; he isof royal blood.
Too like the sire for everbeing good.
First hang the child, thathe may see it sprawl,
a sight to vex thefather's soul withal.
Get me a ladder.
Lucius, save the child,
and bear it from me to theempress.
If thou do this, I'll showthee wondrous things
that highly may advantagethee to hear.
If thou wilt not, befallwhat may befall,
I'll speak no more butvengeance rot you all!
Say on; and if it pleaseme which thou speak'st,
thy child shall live, andI will see it nourished.
And if it please thee.
Why, assure thee, Lucius,
'twill vex thy soul tohear what I shall speak;
for I must talk of murders,rapes, and massacres,
acts of black night,abominable deeds,
complots of mischief,treason, villainies,
ruthful to hear, yetpiteously performed.
And this shall all beburied in my death,
unless thou swear to me mychild shall live.
Tell on thy mind.
I say thy child shalllive.
Swear that he shall, andthen I will begin.
Who should I swear by?
Thou believest no god.
That granted, how canstthou believe an oath?
What if I do not, asindeed I do not?
Yet, for I know thou artreligious
and hast a thing withinthee called conscience;
therefore, I urge thyoath.
For that I know an idiotholds his bauble for a god,
and keeps the oath whichby that god he swears,
to that I'll urge him.
Therefore, thou shalt vowby that same god
what god soe'er it be thatthou adorest
and hast in reverence
to save my boy, to nourishand bring him up;
or else I will discovernought to thee.
Even by my god, I swear tothee I will.
First know thou, I begothim on the empress.
O, most insatiate andluxurious woman!
Tut, Lucius; this was buta deed of charity
to that which thou shalthear of me anon.
'Twas her two sons thatmurdered Bassianus.
They cut thy sister'stongue and ravished her
and cut her hands andtrimmed her as thousaw'st.
O, detestable villain!
Call'st thou thattrimming?
Why, she was washed andcut and trimmed,
and 'twas trim sport for themwhich had the doing of it.
O, barbarous beastlyvillains like thyself!
Indeed, I was their tutorto instruct them.
That codding spirit hadthey from their mother,
as sure a card as ever wonthe set.
That bloody mind, I think,they learned of me,
as true a dog as everfought at head.
Well, let my deeds bewitness of my worth.
I trained thy brethren tothat guileful hole
where the dead corpse ofBassianus lay.
I wrote the letter thatthy father found
and hid the gold withinthat letter mentioned,
confederate with the queenand her two sons.
And what not done, thatthou hast cause to rue,
wherein I had no stroke ofmischief in it?
I played the cheater forthy father's hand,
and when I had it, drewmyself apart
and almost broke my heartwith extreme laughter.
I pried me through thecrevice of a wall,
when, for his hand, he hadhis two sons' heads,
beheld his tears, andlaughed so heartily
that both mine eyes wererainy like to his.
And when I told theempress of this sport,
she sounded almost at mypleasing tale
and for my tidings gave metwenty kisses.
What, canst thou say allthis and never blush?
Ay, like a black dog, asthe saying is.
Art thou not sorry forthese heinous deeds?
Ay, that I had not done athousand more.
Even now I curse the day and yet, I think,
few come within thecompass of my curse
wherein I did not somenotorious ill
as kill a man, or elsedevise his death,
ravish a maid, or plot theway to do it,
accuse some innocent andforswear myself,
set deadly enmity betweentwo friends,
make poor men's cattlebreak their necks,
set fire on barns andhaystacks in the night,
and bid the owners quenchthem with their tears.
Oft have I digged up deadmen from their graves
and set them upright attheir dear friends' door
even when their sorrowsalmost was forgot
and on their skins, as onthe bark of trees,
have with my knife carvedin Roman letters,
"Let not your sorrow die,though I am dead."
Tut, I have done athousand dreadful things
as willingly as one wouldkill a fly,
and nothing grieves meheartily indeed
but that I cannot do tenthousand more.
Bring down the devil, forhe must not die
so sweet a death ashanging presently.
If there be devils, wouldI were a devil,
to live and burn ineverlasting fire,
so I might have yourcompany in hell
but to torment you with mybitter tongue!
Sirs, stop his mouth, andlet him speak no more!
My lord, there is amessenger from Rome
desires to be admitted toyour presence.
Let him come near.
Welcome, Aemilius.
What's the news from Rome?
Lord Lucius, and youprinces of the Goths,
the Roman emperor greetsyou all by me,
and, for he understandsyou are in arms,
he craves a parley at yourfather's house,
willing you to demand yourhostages,
and they shall beimmediately delivered.
What says our general?
Aemilius, let the emperorgive his pledges
unto my father and my uncleMarcus, and we will come.
March away!
Thus, in this strange andsad habiliment,
I will encounter withAndronicus
and say I am Revenge, sentfrom below
to join with him and righthis heinous wrongs.
Knock at his study, wherethey say he keeps
to ruminate strange plotsof dire revenge.
Tell him Revenge is cometo join with him,
and work confusion on hisenemies.
Who doth molest mycontemplation?
Is it your trick to makeme ope the door,
that so my sad decrees mayfly away
and all my study be to noeffect?
You are deceived; for whatI mean to do
see here in bloody lines Ihave set down,
and what is written shallbe executed.
Titus, I am come to talkwith thee.
No, not a word.
How can I grace my talk,
wanting a hand to give itthat accord?
You have the odds of me;therefore no more.
If thou didst know me,thou wouldst talk with me.
I am not mad; I know theewell enough.
Witness this wretchedstump.
Witness these crimsonlines.
Witness these trenchesmade by grief and care.
Witness the tiring day andheavy night.
Witness all sorrow that Iknow thee well
for our proud empress,mighty Tamora.
Is not thy coming for myother hand?
Know thou, sad man, I amnot Tamora.
She is thy enemy and I thyfriend.
I am Revenge, sent fromthe infernal kingdom
to ease the gnawingvulture of thy mind
by working wreakfulvengeance on thy foes.
Therefore, come down andwelcome me to this world'slight.
Confer with me of murderand of death;
There's not a hollow caveor lurking place,
no vast obscurity or mistyvale
where bloody murder ordetested rape
can couch for fear but Iwill find them out
and in their ear tell themmy dreadful name,
Revenge, which makes thefoul offender quake.
Art thou Revenge?
And art thou sent to me to bea torment to mine enemies?
I am; therefore come downand welcome me.
Do me some service ere Icome to thee.
Lo, by thy side where Rapeand Murder stands.
Now give some surance thatthou art Revenge.
Stab them, or tear them onthy chariot wheel.
And then I'll come and bethy wagoner
and whirl along with theeabout the globes.
Provide thee two properpalfreys, black as jet,
to hale thy vengeful wagonswift away,
and find out murderers intheir guilty caves.
And when thy car is loadenwith their heads,
I will dismount, and bythy wagon wheel
trot like a servilefootman, all day long,
even from Hyperion'srising in the east
until his very downfall inthe sea.
And day by day I'll dothis heavy task,
so thou destroy Rapine andMurder there.
These are my ministers andcome with me.
Are they thy ministers?
What are they called?
Rape and Murder; thereforecalled so
'cause they take vengeanceof such kind of men.
Good Lord, how like theempress' sons they are!
And you the empress!
But we worldly men havemiserable, mad, mistaking eyes.
O, sweet Revenge, now do Icome to thee.
And, if one arm's embracementwill content thee,
I will embrace thee in itby and by.
This closing with him fitshis lunacy.
Whate'er I forge to feedhis brain-sick humors
do you uphold and maintainin your speeches,
for now he firmly takes mefor Revenge.
And, being credulous inthis mad thought,
I'll make him send forLucius his son,
and whilst I at a banquethold him sure,
I'll find some cunningpractice out of hand
to scatter and dispersethe giddy Goths,
or at the least, make themhis enemies.
See, here he comes, and Imust ply my theme.
Long have I been forlorn,and all for thee.
Welcome, dread Fury, to mywoeful house.
Rapine and Murder, you arewelcome too.
How like the empress andher sons you are.
Well are you fitted, hadyou but a Moor.
Could not all hell affordyou such a devil?
For well I wot the empressnever wags
but in her company thereis a Moor.
And, would you representour queen aright,
it were convenient you hadsuch a devil.
But welcome as you are.
What shall we do?
What wouldst thou have usdo, Andronicus?
Show me a murderer; I'lldeal with him.
Show me a villain thathath done a rape,
and I am sent to berevenged on him.
Show me a thousand thathath done thee wrong,
and I will be revenged onthem all.
Look round about thewicked streets of Rome,
and when thou find'st aman that's like thyself,
good Murder, stab him;he's a murderer.
Go thou with him, and whenit is thy hap
to find another that islike to thee,
good Rapine, stab him;he's a ravisher.
Go thou with them, and inthe emperor's court
there is a queen, attendedby a Moor.
Well shalt thou know herby thine own proportion,
for up and down she dothresemble thee.
I pray thee, do on themsome violent death.
They have been violent tome and mine.
Well hast thou lessonedus.
This shall we do.
But would it please thee,good Andronicus,
to send for Lucius, thythrice-valiant son,
who leads towards Rome aband of warlike Goths,
and bid him come andbanquet at thy house.
When he is here, even atthy solemn feast,
I will bring in theempress and her sons,
the emperor himself, andall thy foes.
And at thy mercy shallthey stoop and kneel,
and on them shalt thouease thy angry heart.
What says Andronicus tothis device?
Marcus, my brother!
'Tis sad Titus calls.
Go, gentle Marcus, to thynephew Lucius.
Thou shalt inquire him outamong the Goths.
Bid him repair to me, andbring with him
some of the chiefestprinces of the Goths.
Bid him encamp hissoldiers where they are.
Tell him the emperor andthe empress too
feast at my house, and heshall feast with them.
This do thou for my love,and so let him,
as he regards his agedfather's life.
This shall I do, and soonreturn again.
Now will I hence about thybusiness,
and take my ministersalong with me.
Nay, nay,
let Rape and Murder staywith me,
or else I'll call mybrother back again
and cleave to no revengebut Lucius.
What say you, boys?
Will you abide with him
whiles I go tell my lordthe emperor
how I have governed ourdetermined jest?
Yield to his humor, smoothand speak him fair,
and tarry with him till Iturn again.
I knew them all, thoughthey suppose me mad,
and will o'er reach themin their own devices
a pair of hell-hounds andtheir cursed dam.
Madam, depart at pleasure.
Leave us here.
Farewell, Andronicus.
Revenge now goes to lay acomplot
to betray thy foes.
I know thou dost;
and sweet Revenge,farewell.
Tell us, old man, howshall we be employed?
Tut, I have work enoughfor you to do.
Publius, come hither,Caius, and Valentine.
What is your will?
Know you these two?
The empress' sons, I takethem: Chiron, Demetrius.
Fie, Publius, fie; thouart too much deceived.
The one is Murder, andRape is the other's name.
And therefore bind them,gentle Publius
Caius and Valentine, layhands on them.
Oft have you heard me wishfor such an hour,
and now I find it;therefore bind them sure,
and stop their mouths ifthey begin to cry.
Villains, forbear!
We are the empress' sons.
And therefore do what weare commanded.
Stop close their mouths.
Let them not speak a word.
Is he sure bound?
Look that you bind themfast.
Come, come, Lavinia.
Look, thy foes are bound.
Sirs, stop their mouths.
Let them not speak to me.
But let them hear whatfearful words I utter.
O, villains, Chiron andDemetrius.
Here stands the spring whomyou have stained with mud;
this goodly summer withyour winter mixed.
You killed her husband,and for that vile fault
two of her brothers werecondemned to death,
my hand cut off and made amerry jest.
Both her sweet hands, hertongue,
and that more dear thanhands or tongue
her spotless chastity
inhuman traitors, youconstrained and forced.
What would you say, if Ishould let you speak?
Villains, for shame youcould not beg for grace.
Hark, wretches, how I meanto martyr you.
This one hand yet is leftto cut your throats,
whiles that Lavinia 'tweenher stumps doth hold
the basin that receivesyour guilty blood.
You know your mother meansto feast with me
and calls herself Revenge,and thinks me mad.
Hark, wretches; I willgrind your bones to dust,
and with your blood and itI'll make a paste;
and of the paste a coffinI will rear
and make two pasties ofyour shameful heads
and bid that strumpet,your unhallowed dam,
like to the earth, swallowher own increase.
This is the feast that Ihave bid her to
and this the banquet sheshall surfeit on;
for worse than Philomelyou used my daughter,
and worse than Progne Iwill be revenged.
And now prepare yourthroats.
Lavinia, come, receive theblood.
Come, come, be every oneofficious
to make this banquet,which I wish may prove
more stern and bloody thanthe centaurs' feast.
Bring them in, for I willplay the cook
and see them ready againsttheir mother comes.
Uncle Marcus, since 'tismy father's mind
that I repair to Rome, Iam content.
And ours with thine,befall what fortune will.
Good uncle, take you inthis barbarous Moor,
this ravenous tiger, thisaccursed devil.
Let him receive nosustenance.
Fetter him till he be broughtunto the empress' face
for testimony of her foulproceedings.
And see the ambush of ourfriends be strong.
I fear the emperor meansno good to us.
Some devil whisper cursesin my ear
and prompt me that mytongue may utter forth
the venomous malice of myswelling heart!
Away, inhuman dog,unhallowed slave!
Sirs, help our uncle toconvey him in.
The trumpets show theemperor is at hand.
What, hath the firmamentmore suns than one?
What boots it thee to canthyself a sun?
Rome's emperor, andnephew, break the parle.
These quarrels must bequietly debated.
The feast is ready whichthe careful Titus
hath ordained to anhonorable end,
for peace, for love, forleague, and good to Rome.
Please you, therefore, drawnigh and take your places.
Marcus, we will.
Welcome, my lord.
Welcome, dread queen.
Welcome, ye warlike Goths.
Welcome, Lucius.
And welcome all.
Although the cheer be poor,'twill fill your stomachs.
Please you eat of it.
Why art thou thus attired,Andronicus?
Because I would be sure tohave all well
to entertain Your Highnessand your empress.
We are beholding to you,good Andronicus.
And if Your Highness knewmy heart, you were.
My lord the emperor,resolve me this:
was it well done of rashVirginius
to slay his daughter withhis own right hand
because she was enforced,stained, and deflowered?
It was, Andronicus.
Your reason, mighty lord.
Because the girl shouldnot survive her shame
and by her presence stillrenew his sorrows.
A reason mighty, strong,and effectual
a pattern, precedent, andlively warrant
for me, most wretched, toperform the like.
Die, die, Lavinia, and thyshame with thee;
and with thy shame thyfather's sorrow die!
What hast thou done,unnatural and unkind?
Killed her for whom mytears have made me blind.
I am as woeful asVirginius was
and have a thousand timesmore cause than he
to do this outrage.
And it now is done.
What, was she ravished?
Tell who did the deed.
Will it please you eat?
Will it please YourHighness feed?
Why hast thou slain thineonly daughter thus?
Not I; 'twas Chiron andDemetrius.
They ravished her, and cutaway her tongue,
and they, 'twas they thatdid her all this wrong.
Go, fetch them hither tous presently.
Why, there they are, bothbaked in this pie
whereof their motherdaintily hath fed,
eating the flesh that sheherself hath bred.
'Tis true, 'tis true: witnessmy knife's sharp point.
Die, frantic wretch, forthis accursed deed!
Can the son's eye beholdhis father bleed?
There's meed for meed,death for a deadly deed!
You sad-faced men, peopleand sons of Rome,
by uproars severed as aflight of fowl
scattered by winds andhigh tempestuous gusts,
O, let me teach you how toknit again
this scattered corn intoone mutual sheaf,
these broken limbs againinto one body,
lest Rome herself be baneunto herself
and she whom mightykingdoms curtsy to,
like a forlorn anddesperate castaway,
do shameful execution onherself.
But if my frosty signs andchaps of age,
grave witnesses of trueexperience,
cannot induce you toattend my words,
speak, Rome's dear friend,as erst our ancestor,
when with his solemntongue he did discourse
to love-sick Dido's sadattending ear
the story of that balefulburning night,
when subtle Greeks surprisedKing Priam's Troy.
Tell us what Sinon hathbewitched our ears,
and who hath brought thefatal engine in
that gives our Troy, ourRome, the civil wound.
My heart is not compact offlint nor steel,
nor can I utter all ourbitter griefs,
but floods of tears willdrown my oratory
and break my utterance,even in the time
when it should move ye toattend me most,
and force you tocommiseration.
Here's Rome's youngcaptain.
Let him tell the tale
while I stand by and weepto hear him speak.
Then, gracious auditory,be it known to you
that Chiron and the damnedDemetrius
were they that murderedour emperor's brother.
And they it were thatravished our sister.
For their fell faults ourbrothers were beheaded,
our father's tears despised,and basely cozened
of that true hand thatfought Rome's quarrel out
and sent her enemies untothe grave.
Lastly, myself unkindlybanished,
the gates shut on me, andturned weeping out
to beg relief among Rome'senemies,
who drowned their enmityin my true tears
and oped their arms toembrace me as a friend.
I am the turned forth, beit known to you,
that have preserved herwelfare in my blood
and from her bosom tookthe enemy's point,
sheathing the steel in myadventurous body.
Alas; you know I am novaunter, I.
My scars can witness, dumbalthough they are,
that my report is just andfull of truth.
But, soft; methinks I dodigress too much,
citing my worthlesspraise.
O, pardon me.
For when no friends areby, men praise themselves.
Now is my turn to speak.
Behold the child.
Of this was Tamoradelivered,
the issue of anirreligious Moor,
chief architect andplotter of these woes.
The villain is alive inTitus' house,
and as he is, to witnessthis is true.
Now judge what cause hadTitus to revenge
these wrongs unspeakable,past patience,
or more than any livingman could bear.
Now have you heard thetruth.
What say you, Romans?
Have we done aught amiss,show us wherein,
and, from the place whereyou behold us pleading,
the poor remainder ofAndronici
will, hand in hand, allheadlong hurl ourselves
and on the ragged stonesbeat forth our souls
and make a mutual closureof our house.
Speak, Romans, speak.
And if you say we shall,lo, hand in hand,
Lucius and I will fall.
Come, Marcus, come, thoureverend man of Rome,
and bring our emperorgently in thy hand,
Lucius our emperor;
for well I know the commonvoice do cry it shall be so.
Lucius, all hail, Rome'sroyal emperor!
Go to old Titus' sorrowfulhouse
and hither hale thatmisbelieving Moor
to be adjudged somedireful slaughtering death
as punishment for his mostwicked life.
Lucius, all hail, Rome'sgracious governor!
Thanks, gentle Romans.
May I govern so to healRome's harms
and wipe away her woe.
But gentle people, give meaim awhile,
for nature puts me to aheavy task.
Stand all aloof, but,uncle, draw you near
to shed obsequious tearsupon this trunk.
O, take this warm kiss onthy pale cold lips,
these sorrowful drops uponthy blood-stained face
the last true duties ofthy noble son.
Tear for tear and lovingkiss for kiss
thy brother Marcus tenderson thy lips.
O, were the sum of thesethat I should pay
countless and infinite,yet would I pay them.
Come hither, boy.
Come, come, and learn ofus to melt in showers.
Thy grandsire loved theewell.
Many a time he danced theeon his knee,
sung thee asleep, hisloving breast thy pillow.
Many a story hath he toldto thee
and bid thee bear hispretty tales in mind
and talk of them when hewas dead and gone.
How many thousand timeshave these poor lips,
when they were living,warmed themselves on thine.
O, now, sweet boy, givethem their latest kiss.
Bid him farewell; commithim to the grave.
Do them that kindness andtake leave of them.
Grandsire, Grandsire, evenwith all my heart,
were I were dead so youdid live again.
O Lord, I cannot speak tohim for weeping.
My tears will choke me, ifI ope my mouth.
You sad Andronici, havedone with woes.
Give sentence on theexecrable wretch
who hath been breeder ofthese dire events.
Set him breast-deep inearth and famish him.
There let him stand andrave and cry for food.
If any one relieves orpities him,
for the offence he dies.
This is our doom.
Ah, why should wrath bemute and fury dumb?
I am no baby, I, that withbase prayers
I should repent the evilsI have done.
Ten thousand worse thanever yet I did
would I perform, if Imight have my will.
If one good deed in all mylife I did,
I do repent it from myvery soul.
Some loving friends conveythe emperor hence
and give him burial in hisfather's grave.
My father and Laviniashall forthwith be closed
in our household'smonument.
As for that ravenoustiger, Tamora
no funeral rite nor man inmourning weed.
No mournful bell shallring her burial,
but throw her forth tobeasts and birds to prey.
Her life was beastly anddevoid of pity,
and being dead, let birdson her take pity.